Good morning. This is April 6, 1985. We are in the
living room of Bob Cornish, and I am Bob Cornish.
And I'm interviewing Robert Ashcroft from San
Antonio this morning. Bob has been a longtime
activist in planning matters in San Antonio. And
Bob, I'd like to start out first with going back to
the origins of San Antonio briefly and describing
the influence of the Spanish Law of the Indies on
San Antonio and what remains of it at the present
time. Well, I think that we've got to recognize
with San Antonio early 18th century that It was a
Spanish colonial settlement. San Antonio was
also significant because it had all three of the
Spanish types of settlement. It had the
religious, the military, and the civil. And all of
those had a great deal of influence on San Antonio.
Of course, the first was the religious with the
missions, and five of which still exist in various
states of of restoration and repair. The
Presidia, which was the first
military settlement, is at the heart of downtown.
The original square is where City Hall is today,
and that dates from about 1730 or 1731. And then
about,
I guess a decade or so later, the Pueblo, the first
civil settlement, which was the Canary
Islanders, was the next plaza to the east, which
today is where the courthouse is, and that's known
as Main Plaza. And a lot's been written about the
significance of those early planned settlements
on San Antonio, and they still maintain an
influence today, both in terms of the street
system and the system of plazas and squares and
open spaces downtown, as well as the influence of
the missions on later planning. For example, the
whole effort to deal with the San Antonio River
corridor that reemerged in the 1960s and the river
walk at an earlier period of time. And as I said,
people like reps. And others have documented
extensively the plans of those settlements and
their influence, not only on San Antonio's
development over a period of time, but their
influence on American planning.
So the early plans were influenced by the Spanish
and the Canary Islanders. Let's move ahead to the
introduction of formal professional planning
into San Antonio. OK. Let me just say as kind of a
transition thing, What we're talking about with
respect to the Spanish and their formal plans
dates from the early 18th century. And if one looks
at the rest of the 18th century and most all of the
19th century, there was very little formal city
planning being undertaken in San Antonio. I think
it's interesting to note that toward the latter
half of the 19th century, post-Civil War period,
particularly after 1880, that we started seeing
put in place in San Antonio some of those elements
that would later affect some of the planning. In
other words, we saw the first efforts to do
large-scale development. Communities like
Alamo Heights and then the area along around what
is today known as Woodlawn Lake, which was then
known as West End Lake. These were fairly large
scale planned developments. And I think Alamo
Heights as a community is particularly
interesting in terms of its street pattern. It's
kind of a curvilinear street pattern, which is
very unusual for that period of time in San
Antonio. And in fact, it's unusual for San Antonio
until relatively recently because San Antonio
grew by the use of just adding grids, the gridiron
street pattern, and it wasn't necessarily just a
continuation. One person that needs to be talked
to, and he's got a great set of graphics that depict
the development of San Antonio's gridiron street
pattern over a period of of 150 years is a San
Antonio architect by the name of Alex Caragon,
C-A-R-A-G-O-N-N-E,
and he's with Caragon Reyna. And Alex developed a
set of maps that showed how San Antonio evolved
with this gridiron street pattern. Getting back
to my point, we saw developers for the first time,
we saw the street railway system initially being
an ox drawn, the first line, an ox drawn system, the
first line extending from in front of the Alamo on
Alamo Plaza up to San Pedro Park. And then later the
electric companies came in and all of these had a
substantial influence on how the community grew
over a period of time. But up until really the
1920s, there was no formal city planning in San
Antonio. It was all being done sort of
incrementally by the private sector. And it's not
until the very late 1920s that we see for the first
time an attempt on the part of the local government
to do some what we recognize today as community or
city planning. What caused the city to move in the
direction of conscious city planning? Was there
any event or series of events that indicated that
the city should, in fact, have citywide planning?
Well, I'm not sure that we could I'm not sure we
could or anyone could identify a specific event or
reason for the city consciously initiating a
planning effort. I think probably, like most
communities, San Antonio faced a lot of problems
in terms of very rapid growth. What you've got to
realize is that San Antonio's growth rate per
decade, if you look at, say, from the 1880s to the
1920s and 1930s, San Antonio literally went from a
small
frontier settlement to the largest metropolitan
area in Texas. And it grew from 10,000 people to
well over a quarter of a million people. Its growth
rate per decade averaged 75% to 80%. So it was
almost doubling in size each 10-year period of
time. The cumulative effects of that growth over a
period of time, particularly with the
introduction of the automobile substantial
increase in population I think led a lot of
citizens and particularly some of the public
officials to the point where they decided that it
was important that a comprehensive look be made of
the city and to see if there was anything
consciously that the city could do to better deal
with its growth and I think that this is true of most
cities and it's true of Each period of time that San
Antonio got serious about planning, and it wasn't
just in the late 1920s, the same thing happened in
the 1970s. It was in reaction to growth or growth
issues. So I don't think it was a single event. I
think it was just the cumulative effect of a lot of
these things. Did the railroads have much effect
on the growth of San Antonio in its early years?
That would be right. before the Civil War and
immediately after. I guess the railroads did to
the extent that the railroads made San Antonio
more accessible to the outside world. Over a
period of about 30 or 40 years, San Antonio became a
major terminus point for, I think, four major
railroads. And there were four major railroad
stations in San Antonio. So I think that had an
effect on just the growth. I'm not sure how much
effect it had in terms of development patterns,
per se. I think that the intra-urban railway
system, particularly the street railway system
was much more significant to San Antonio in that
frequently the land developer
who bought several hundred acres on the outskirts
of the city actually started a street railway
system just to provide the access to the
development so that he could sell lots. And in
fact, what someone should do, Ann Morial Watson,
who is currently the executive director of the San
Antonio Conservation Society, wrote her
master's thesis at Trinity University on a look at
the street railway system in San Antonio and its
contributions to the development of San Antonio.
And I think that's a paper that if someone wants to
get into this area, the detail needs to be looked
at. So I think the local railways as opposed to the
inter-urban railways had much more of an effect on
San Antonio. In terms of its pattern. In terms of
its development pattern. In terms of numbers,
probably the railroads had quite an effect, I
would think. Just in assisting growth. Right.
Okay.
Bob, when was the first legislative
authorization of a comprehensive plan in San
Antonio? Well, the first formal authorization
came with our current charter. And let me explain
the background of that a little bit because it is
rather significant.
In the very early 1950s, late 1940s, early 1950s,
there was a substantial reaction among the
progressive element in San Antonio about the
correct corruption in municipal government. And
it was a typical reform type of movement. And San
Antonio had had a commissioned form of government
dating back to about the 19- somewhere in the first
decade of the 20th century. They established a
commissioned form of government and had that for a
period of almost 40 years. It was perceived as very
corrupt. A group of citizens got together and
drew up a charter for a council manager form of
government, feeling that the council manager
form of government was the best system that
minimize political influence. The city would be
run by a professional city manager, and the city
council, although elected, would basically just
set policy and not be involved in the day-to-day
operation of government. And that involvement in
the day-to-day operation of government was the
thing that really bothered people. So in late
1951, the charter was drawn up, It was approved by
the voters in very early 1952, I think January
1952, and the council manager for government came
to San Antonio. Now, the significant thing about
the charter, in addition to its form of
government, is Article 9. In Article 9 of the city
charter, established for the first time the
planning function in San Antonio. And it did it in a
very... substantial in explicit way. State
statute makes no provision in Texas for the
planning function of the municipal corporation.
There's no mandated planning in Texas But the city
charter, Article 9 in San Antonio, mandates
planning. And it does so by, first of all, saying
that the city shall have a master plan. It's not
permissive. It's mandatory.
That section of the article of the charter also
creates the planning commission. It creates the
planning department. It specifies... to a
certain extent, and this is probably its greatest
weakness, what is meant by a master plan. And
there's only one sentence in there that explains
what a master plan should be. But there's an entire
section in there significantly explaining the
legal effect of the master plan. So that once a plan
is adopted in San Antonio, the plan has a
substantial legal effect. and as I said, the plan
is mandated there, so San Antonio's formal,
official, legislative planning beginnings
really date from January of 1952 with the start of
the San Antonio Charter and particularly Article
9 of that charter. That's interesting that there
was such a late start in San Antonio. Most cities
got planning underway in the 1910s or the 1920s
with the standard acts and with starting with the
standard zoning act and then of course the
standard city planning enabling act after that
and most states patterned their state enabling
legislation after the standard acts which of
course, has troubled United States planning to
this day because they started out first with
zoning and then went to planning after that. But
maybe... Well, let me respond to that. First of
all, the question was, when was San Antonio
officially...
When did San Antonio officially recognize
planning their mandate? And that was the date,
January 1952. That is not to say, A, that the city of
San Antonio wasn't engaged in certain types of
planning activities prior to that time, and it
did, San Antonio had adopted zoning in November of
1938, so it had zoning prior to planning. And some
semblance of subdivision regulations, although
The formal modern subdivision regulations in San
Antonio really date from about 1958, although
there were some semblances of those prior to that
time. And some planning efforts that predated the
1952 thing, but the official thing started in
1952. What were the pre-official efforts in
planning? Well, the major one Well, there were
two. The first one was an attempt, and I started
talking about this earlier, in the late 1920s to do
a plan for the city of San Antonio. And the city
appointed about, I guess, 50 or so members to a city
plan commission.
There were a committee, I guess it was called.
There were 56 citizens on it. And in October of
1929, the city, through this committee,
contracted with Harlan Bartholomew and
Associates out of St. Louis to work with the city to
draw up a master plan for the city. The effort took
four years and part of that was because of the
nature of the committee. There were various
subcommittees that worked with the consultant in
different areas. Part of it was also the lingering
effect of the depression. The city actually ran
out of money at one point in time and broke off its
relationship with Bartholomew and had not
something been done, San Antonio would never have
had that plan finished. what happened was some
private citizens that were able to keep the effort
going until the city had some additional funds. So
the plan, Bartholomew finished the plan and
delivered it to the city in March of 1933, and the
city commission officially approved that plan.
The plan itself was kind of an interesting
document. First of all, it dealt largely with just
the 36 square miles that was within the corporate
limits at that time. San Antonio, when it became a
legal entity during the Republic of Texas period,
was originally charted as a 36 square mile area.
Those boundaries did not change at all for over 100
years. It wasn't until 1940 when when San Antonio
did its first annexation of Los Angeles Heights,
that those boundaries changed. So Bartholomew,
in doing his planning in the early 1930s, just
dealt basically with the 36 square mile area. So if
you look at, he did produce a single plan graphic
and a document. And the plan graphic is really kind
of a fascinating
depiction of a lot of his ideas. related, most of
his ideas related to open space, to parks, to
boulevards connecting things, and those types of
things which were very popular in those days.
Yeah, the typical city beautiful plan. Yes, yes.
Is a copy available? Yes, I am in the process. Now,
there is only one copy available of the original
colored graphic. I know where that is. I am having
reproduced copies of that and written some high
quality reproductions. That could be available
for you. That could be, yes, and that can and will be
available. And then there is a document that I
think there were probably only four or five
original copies of the report that Bartholomew
submitted with the plan. And they were kind of
interesting to see in there. Apparently they were
just typewritten and they were carbon copies. And
there is a bound volume of that that the city
planning department has. But they do not have the
graphic. The graphic is in private hands. Who has
that? I don't want to disclose the name.
So, but I'm making arrangements to have that
regrouped. And it's kind of an amazing, an amazing
document. As we'll see, hopefully, as we discuss
later, a plan done by the, a plan graphic done by the
city in the 1960s is also kind of an amazing thing to
look at and to study and to see how well the planner
did a job of both anticipating how the city might
grow and coming up with some solutions to the
problems that the city was facing. But the point is
that in March of 33, the Bartholomew plan was
adopted by the city commission. Not really much
happened in terms of implementing that plan at
all. Now normally, on that point, Bartholomew,
whenever he contracted with a city, would insist
on leaving one of his senior staff planners there
to implement the plan, such as in Corpus Christi
and or El Paso. But that doesn't seem to have
happened in San Antonio. Well, yes. And the reason
that probably didn't happen is because the
governmental structure at that time had no
provision for staff. In other words, in 1933, And
in fact, up until the charter in 1952, there was no
formal planning staff in the city. So one had to
look at the city engineer or someone like that. And
I think the real problem with the Bartholomew plan
was the lack of structure and the lack of
mechanisms to implement it. I think one could, and
this is getting out on a limb, but one could
probably say that that the adoption of the zoning
ordinance in 1938, if one looked at the zoning
districts that were proposed, and I think there
were 13 original zoning districts, and went back
and related those to some of the things in the
Bartholomew plan, that the people that probably
drew up the first zoning district map did refer to
Bartholomew's plan. And that's an assumption on
my part. But other than that... There seems to be a
relationship. There seems to be some
relationship there. But other than that, there
really was not much of an effort, a formal effort,
either through subdivision regulations, which
were largely non-existent at that time, through
capital improvement programs of any type, which
also there weren't many significant... at that
time, nor through zoning, nor through city staff
to implement it. So, whereas Bartholomew, as you
said, in other cities may have had the opportunity
to put one of his persons in there, that just didn't
occur. The other thing that's significant here is
that, is that that plan came to the city at probably
the worst time financially, and that's during the
Depression. The city of San Antonio just had real
problems providing basic services. And as I
mentioned earlier, that it was only through the
efforts of the private sector that the plan even
got finished. If it was up to the city government,
that plan probably would never have been
finished. Speaking of that Depression era, San
Antonio benefited quite a bit The Roosevelt
administration, WPA and so forth, could you
comment a bit about the public works
administration and what they did to improve San
Antonio? Well, yeah, most of that happened at the
end of the 1930s into the 1940s, but That was
probably the start of the whole era of project
planning in San Antonio, which in my opinion has
been a much stronger effort than comprehensive
planning. Project planning, I mean, local
government is involved, but rather than focusing
on the entire city or an entire area, it dealt with a
project. or a function. The first substantial
effort was the restoration of the La Vita area,
which occurred, that project started in the late
1930s under Maury Maverick, who was mayor at that
time. And then that was followed by the other major
significant project, which was the Riverwalk,
the Paseo Del Rio. Most of that construction
occurred during the early 1940s. And those two
projects, I think, really set the tone for project
planning in San Antonio. And although they've
come to have very significant consequences for
the city of San Antonio, initially they didn't
have a particular... effect in terms of creating a
lot of additional development. The river walk,
Upsit Doria, really sat for decades without
anything being done. La Vita worked a little bit
better than the river, but both of those were very
early examples of something. And there were other
projects, those were not the only two, but those
were the two outstanding The WPA and the CCC and
others accomplished literally dozens of
projects in San Antonio. And also significantly,
there
was a lot of effort in the area of documentation. A
lot of measured drawings were done during that
period of time. Some guides were done. I've got
copies of guides for both the river and lobby each
of it were done by the WPA, pointing out how this
whole thing turned out. Well, my understanding is
that the Riverwalk situation came about largely
because something had to be done about blood
control. Correct. And the Los Olmos Dam was built
to control the San Antonio River after the
downtown had been flooded to a depth of six feet, I
believe in 1925. Yeah. Well, the dam came much
later. Correct. There was a devastating, well,
there were a series of floods that occurred in the
first couple of decades of the 20th century. I
think it was 1923. I could be wrong on that date. It
could have been 25. There was a major flood in
downtown San Antonio, largely because of If one
looks at the surface hydrology of San Antonio,
above the headwaters of the San Antonio River in
the Bracken Ridge Park area, above that is the
whole Olmos River Basin. And what would happen is
you would have huge rainfalls up there and that
would just come right down through the middle of
downtown. The reaction to that was let's do
something about the river. Apparently the
downtown merchants insisted that the city
council do something. Yeah, and basically it was
a, one of the proposals was a flood control
proposal which would basically have put the river
underground. And the reaction to that is the
famous story about the birth of the San Antonio
Conservation Society in the 1920s and Miss Emily
Edwards who was its first president was the woman
who prevailed upon the city commission at that
time to quote unquote save the river in the famous
puppet show and all that's been documented and
that led then to the city holding off on doing
something about that stringent flood control
measure and that allowed the opportunity with
Robert Huggman's idea later to come up with the
Paseo Del Rio. Without the Conservation
Society's initial effort, there wouldn't have
been anything for Huggman to plan. He had no
official role with the city. I think it was mostly
with the conservation group. Well, Hugman's
effort was kind of a separate effort from the
society. Hugman worked directly with some
downtown property owners, particularly Jack
White, who at that time owned what was then the
Plaza Hotel.